docs: add biweekly report (#131)
GreptimeTeam/docs: docs/changelog/biweekly-report/2022-12-16-biweekly-report.md

# 2022.11.24 ~ 2022.12.9 —— Allowing S3 Storage

December 15, 2022 · 6 min read

>Since open-sourced on Nov.15, the GreptimeDB community has merged 21 PRs from 10 contributors. That's nearly 25% of the whole project. What a productive month! This article updates two of the good first issues that we are working on and two of the highlighted features.

## Introduction

> It's only been three weeks and the community has already received lots of attention and powerful support from developers scattered around the world. Their talent and passion took us by surprise and strengthened our belief in open source.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
It's only been three weeks and the community has already received lots of attentions and powerful support from developers around the world. Their talent and passion took us by surprise and strengthened our belief in open source.
```

*Biweekly Reports* will be a series of quick reports that update our progress regularly. We hope, in this way, members and friends could understand what the project is doing and how they would participate in the GreptimeDB community.

Here are also some good examples of our issue pools. They would be perfect for newcomers, so please have faith in yourself and join us right away!

Join us at [github.com](https://github.com/GreptimeTeam/greptimedb)

## Contributors list: (In alphabetical order)

[@azhsmesos](https://github.com/azhsmesos) [@DiamondMofeng](https://github.com/DiamondMofeng) [@dongxuwang](https://github.com/dongxuwang)

[@e1ijah1](https://github.com/e1ijah1) [@francis-du](https://github.com/francis-du) [@lbt05](https://github.com/lbt05)

[@lizhemingi](https://github.com/lizhemingi) [@morigs](https://github.com/morigs) [@SSebo](https://github.com/SSebo) [@Xuanwo](https://github.com/Xuanwo)

> A big THANK YOU for the generous and brilliant contributions! It is people like you who are making GreptimeDB a great product. Let's keep up the good work!

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A big THANK YOU for the generous and brilliant contributions! It is people like you who are making GreptimeDB a great product. Let's keep up with the wonderful work!
```

Join us at [github.com](https://github.com/GreptimeTeam/greptimedb)

## Good first issue

### Issue #667 (Closed)

Link：https://github.com/GreptimeTeam/greptimedb/issues/667

Issue description:

When we define `TIME INDEX` column,
for example `CREATE TABLE` SQL:

```SQL
CREATE TABLE system_metrics (
    host STRING,
    idc STRING,
    ts TIMESTAMP NOT NULL,
    PRIMARY KEY(host, idc),
    TIME INDEX(ts)
);
```

there are two special column specifications: `PRIMARY KEY` and `TIME INDEX`. The first one is used to define primary keys (or tags in some systems), and the second is to define which column is the special timestamp column.

For `TIMESTAMP` column, a simplification is to change the grammar to:

```SQL
ts TIMESTAMP TIME INDEX,
```

By doing so, it

> - need not to write `NOT NULL`, this is implied by `TIME INDEX` keywords

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- does not need to write `NOT NULL`, this is implied by `TIME INDEX` keywords
```

> - need not to specify `TIME INDEX` in another line

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- does not need to specify `TIME INDEX` in another line
```

GreptimeDB now supports both of these two grammar rules. Users can choose one of them according to their preference.

### Issue #602 (**Help Wanted**)

Link:  https://github.com/GreptimeTeam/greptimedb/issues/602

Issue description:

Add system tables for inner metrics.

> It's good to have a metrics table like the one in [Databend](https://databend.rs/doc/sql-reference/system-tables/system-metrics) or [ClickHouse](https://clickhouse.com/docs/en/operations/system-tables/metrics/). Users can easily "select" on the metrics table to see DB's important running status. With the metrics table, we can integrate other visualization tools or dashboards that support SQL like Grafana, to export some meaningful time series data.

Reviewer: With the metrics table, we can integrate other visualization tools or dashboards that support SQL like Grafana, to export some meaningful time series data.  
```please review this sentence above, feel like the sub is missing

Reviewer: sub is unclear

1. In datanode, create a new table called `metrics`, with a schema including at least `metric`, `value`, and `description`, and also feel free to add other columns when necessary. Register it into the default catalog as our `ScriptsTable` does.
2. Implement "select" for the metrics table. Instead of actually storing the metrics, call the `render()` method of `PROMETHEUS_HANDLE`, and parse the result (Prometheus lines) as table output.

> 3. In frontend, create the same metrics table as well. Unlike `DistTable`, the metrics table does not do distributed queries.

Reviewer: Unlike `DistTable`, the metrics table does not do distributed queries.
```suggest to change "do" distributed queries to other verbs, such as, does not execute

Reviewer 2: @apdong2022 it seems the suggestions are lost.

Reviewer: > @apdong2022 it seems the suggestions are lost.

please check again

[#656](https://github.com/GreptimeTeam/greptimedb/pull/656)

GreptimeDB is using OpenDAL as the object storage service, so theoretically, S3 storage should be a piece of cake. (Contributor: [killme2008](https://github.com/killme2008))

[#558](https://github.com/GreptimeTeam/greptimedb/pull/558)

GreptimeDB now supports syntax like `DESC[RIBE] TABLE <name>;` to describe the structure of a table, as well as the default values. (Contributor: [morigs](https://github.com/morigs))

### New things

- In the latest [release of gtctl](https://github.com/GreptimeTeam/gtctl/releases/tag/v0.1.0-alpha.7), users can customize mirror repository.
- We are now developing a dashboard for GreptimeDB. It's still at a very early stage and has a basic UI. Feel free to have a go. Visit https://github.com/GreptimeTeam/dashboard

## Recent Blog Recommendations

[Have a Grep Time, Making the Most of 2023 - GreptimeDB Roadmap for Next Year | Greptime Blog](https://greptime.com/blogs/2022-11-29-have-a-grep-time-making-the-most-of-2023.html)

> This roadmap presents goals our team is working on and concepts we have for our shared community. It gives people a sense of what to expect in GreptimeDB over the next 6 months. Furthermore, it helps provide "starting points" for how to get involved, and a sense of what kind of projects we are looking for.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This roadmap presents goals our team is working on and concepts we have for our shared community. It gives people a sense of what to expect in GreptimeDB over the next 6 months. Furthermore, it provides a "starting points" for how to get involved, and a sense of what kind of projects we are looking for.
```
